of the expectation of the life of the book, then it's a wonderful method.
But if you start for a de-explication, let's say a book from 1860 or 1870, that's a bad decision.
So papers thinking is not enough to save it for you.
So this is more or less preventive maintenance.
Yes, that's what you're doing here.
entering the equation earlier, I guess, before the book is really bad.
But did you, Mr. Otto, told you about the paper splitting, about the volumes, about the volumes too?
There's a wonderful breakpoint.
And the idea is to have also a
a larger output in the future.
So what, now this is a paper splitter?
The idea is to have, in the economic view, the same situation in the cost like microfilm.
This is what we want to have.
And we are sure we will reach this goal.
So, if you have to make decisions to keep the book for the future,
or to transfer it to a substitute.
So you can decide it.
You have not to decide it by economic way.
This is very important.
And then this is what we think we have to do for food culture, not to shift it to another medium.
So a decision is made
on the basis of anything but economics.
That's fine.
Is this an expensive process now?
It is not cheap.
I would say the kilogram, is it about... I'm nervous.
Yeah, the kilogram is about like the... Two of this many.
So about 10 Deutschmarks a book, in other words.
The book, I would say, books are small and big, so it's difficult to say.
Oh, it's a volume.
Okay, it's weight.
So 20 Deutschmarks for how much?
For one kilo.
For one kilo, okay.
And that could be those three volumes that are one kilo?
That's about a kilo.
If you take this, you can take camera.
That's not bad, actually.
No, no, no.
I would have expected there could be more, actually.
That's for a whole book.
That's pretty good.
Yeah, very impressive.
How old are these units here?
How long have they been around?
They started in 1992.
Oh.
1993.
About 15.
How was your trip?
Oh, I was very late yesterday.
So I had a lot of discussions in the Frankfurt Library, so I came after 11 o'clock.
Oh, really?
And you?
This morning, yeah, we're good.
You had a very early time.
At 5.30?
That's fine, but I'm still on American time.
That's good.
You know, it's really, back home, it's 5 o'clock in the morning at home now, so it's, I don't even know where I am in terms of the time.
Mr. Otto was saying that what's really good is that they don't have to make a decision on whether or not something is to be saved.
Everything is.
Everything that comes down.
We were looking at city directories, telephone books.
He would say, what's the importance of this particular book?
You don't ask that.
This is what we said yesterday.
We have to preserve the books as a
continuum.
It's a literature continuum, not a single book, but to make sure that independent of quality and selection, the book production could be available also in the future.
Therefore, for us it's quite easy.
Other libraries have to develop a strategy to select those books which have to preserve.
But this is a different situation for us.
But we did a lot to sway the policies that we use in our H2P paper.
It was very disrespectful.
The problem was not that there doesn't exist H2P paper in a certain quantity.
quality, but the publishers did not really know about it.
They didn't know about the danger of that sort of thing.
So it was to inform them, to warn them.
And in the meantime, they are quite happy.
That's the season they've made.
I was very pleased that my book was published then.
It's the same like the supermarket.
If you go to the supermarket, you look at the food, what day it is on the article.
And this is the same.
We will inform the users and the readers and the buyers of books, please look in the book if it's the...
the indefinite... Exploration day.
Exploration day.
And if it's best, you can buy it.
If not, you should leave it in the stacks.
This was what the artist has stated.
Our Gutenberg Bible is in Russia.
Where?
In Russia.
In Moscow.
And that was, of course, taken at the end of the war.
The Red Army took...
most of the very important Incunabula and the Gutenberg-Fahrer in 1946 to Russia, and in this case this aeroplane was so important for them.
And it's still, we have seen it last autumn.
As a good condition, have they?
It's in good condition.
And it was the one here in this?
We had in Leipzig had two Bibles.
One was in the Godship with I, and the other was in the university library.
And both were taken?
One is in the Lomonosov University, and the other is in the state library.
Are you trying to get them back?
I have to negotiate until now without success, but we are still optimistic.
I will give a
a lecture this evening about this whole problem in the House of Kids.
Can I get a text of that at some point, do you think?
Can I get a text of your speech on that?
Yeah, it's in German.
That's fine.
Yeah?
My daughter is very good in German.
She should translate.
Yeah.
Paul Kitzner can explain to you how to go, how to do this .
I'll send you an email.
Yeah, it's easy to reach it.
It's in the city.
Good.
Excellent.
Okay.
It's just short enough to take notes.
Okay, go ahead.
I'm sorry, what's it going?
Here we are.
We collect exile literature.
Exile literature.
Who were forbidden?
Who fled the country?
Yes.
Okay.
After the war.
Now these are books or do you have any archives?
Do you have any material?
They are only books.
I see.
None printed material you can find in the
So many exiles outside in Frankfurt.
So you name this at the end?
I see.
Yes, okay.
Good head.
The world for our collection is this world.
Since 1933.
They did not collect, but they did.
So I don't understand you said in 1933 they stopped collecting these authors or they did they started of the exiles they collected the material even though it was forbidden I don't understand
I see.
But it was all collected here.
Yeah.
I didn't know that.
That's very interesting.
That's the purpose of the collection in the Deuteronomy.
I do it.
wanted to collect the metadata.
The works are also in exile.
It was possible, in the main, after the beginning of the World War 1939 in the West.
So they did collect?
Let me put the literature here.
They did.
They collected.
Yes.
And we have books which came into the stock from the Soviet Union in 1941, 1942 up to the
war in this country.
And therefore, is this a lot of collection with many of our cell materials?
I would think so.
We tried to buy some books.
I don't think so.
So all those things are like colligories?
The collection isn't complete.
There are many books that you don't have.
But the collection in Frankfurt, I think, was started after the war, the exile collection.
That's why this is very interesting.
But yours started even while they were going into exile.
I'm amazed by that.
I would have thought the policy would be that these people don't exist.
In the Reichspielerei, it was a special period.
The library was an official institution, a government, semi-governmental.
Any day a state who will forbidden literature must know that.
The state must know which books are known.
The state must know which books, that's right.
And therefore it was allowed by Guthers and Kroon.
Okay, well, let me ask you this then.
The books were collected, right?
And kept here.
But were people allowed to see them?
No.
In this time, yes.
So you kept a record of the books.
You kept a copy of the books.
No.
These books couldn't... Circulate.
Circulate.
No.
No trade, no socialite.
No... I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
Take international bibliography.
I see.
In this time, the actual books couldn't be recorded in the bibliography.
Oh, they couldn't enter them into the bibliography.
They weren't even entered into the bibliography.
They were not entered into the bibliography.
But the librarians, they must, they call it there.
They what?
Say that again?
The librarians, they had to enter into the bibliography.
And therefore,
Yes, okay.
Well, this is very good.
I didn't get his name again.
Such interim list, interim main list of literature that's not worth in the bibliography.
And after the war, these lists were concluded to an supplement of the
So, and this is the supplement.
And what's the name of this book?
German National Bibliography.
But does it identify as the exile books?
In the main, yes.
Yes.
A list of books
Can I see who some of the offices are?
Yes.
This is a Nazi, though.
So this book was published by... This book is... 1941.
Oh, yeah.
1989.
Okay, this is a weird print.
So I can see there's probably a mistake.
Make me a copy of that, too.
Yeah, because I can get it.
So you are the custodian of these books?
Yes.
How large would you say the collection is?
9,000 books.
And we have circa 16,000 numbers of periodical issues.
So, that's 700 periodicals in exile, in German exile.
600, 700?
Titles.
And we count the issues each for one.
There are 16,000 numbers.
Wow.
Okay.
And you did keep a copy.
There was a copy kept of all of them here.
In this place right here?
Yes.
And we have this book.
So what do we call this room now?
This is special collections?
Yes.
These are compact.
Are these the exiled books here?
Yes.
Klausmann, Heinrichmann.
Uh-huh.
Oh, this is good.
Yeah, that's good.
Good.
And it says right on it, Exile.
And you can see our location on board.
That's the year.
The year of the inventory.
Not the publishing year, but the year of acquisition in the inventory.
The letter for format and the current number.
Was this sticker put on in 1944 or is this more recent?
This exile sticker.
It's recent.
I see.
After 1960.
What did the A signify?
It's a lot.
I see.
So how did they know that these were exile books when they first came in?
What is there in this code to tell you that that was an exile book?
Is there anything in that code to tell you?
No.
It's a normal location number of the tribunal.
But it was brought up here.
Yes.
You see what I'm saying?
What if somebody were to go look up this book downstairs in 1945?
They wouldn't find this book in the catalog.
Yes.
They would find it.
Today you would, but you wouldn't find it fifty years ago.
I hope.
Okay, go ahead.
Okay.
And this is where all of the exile books are in here?
All of the exile books are in here.
Yeah, are in here.
And why are they still here?
Why aren't they back in the general collection?
Why have they been kept as a regular collection?
I think because it's a separate collection of the library.
I see.
And we have a separate reading room for this collection.
Oh, you do?
Okay.
And...
That's why this collection is separate.
What floor are we on the sixth floor now?
Fifth.
Okay, very good.
Very interesting.
I want to get one shot from here.
Just to the... Thank you.
One from here to one from here.
These help me when I'm writing.
I don't use them, but it does give me a... Yeah.
It's worthwhile visual stuff.
Great.
Is that a special question?
My question...
The church of the library is a museum.
The museum is founded in 1884.
1884.
And as a private collection from Dresden.
Saxonia, Dresden.
Dresden?
Dresden.
The founder was Heinrich Klemm.
He made clothes.
How do you spell Klemm?
Klemm.
K-L-E-W-M.
And he made clothing.
Yes.
And he is very interesting in the history of printing, especially the history of the printing in German towns of Gutenberg and the
followed printers of Gutenberg in Bamberg, Strasbourg, to Italy and France.
And so the collection was, a special part of the collection was the first print in Germany.
and also he collected he has collected prints in the followed times he is incunabular yes yes and and and then the the printers of the followed of of incunabular
until the 19th century.
Oh, really?
It's his time.
No kidding.
And he was very interested in the questions of the first printers in each town.
In each town, that's very interesting.
Yes.
which stamps and which initials and impressions in the prints.
Did he collect type too?
Yes, yes.
So typefaces?
Bindings?
No, no bindings, no.
He gave all his prints to the book binders in Dresden and they must new bind the books.
So they bound the books there.
That's not good.
Oh, very bad.
And so the collection is... They didn't understand.
He was a man of 19th century.
And he... His private collection and he wanted to see...
gold on the bindings and no pigskin and... They didn't understand then.
They didn't understand how important it is.
Yes, yes.
And so the collection is horror with bindings.
How many books in the collection?
20,000.
20,000?
Wow.
And how did it come to Leipzig?
Yes.
Heinrich Klemm... The USA came to Heinrich Klemm and asked him to give his collection.
Who asked him?
Somebody.
Yes.
And...
But he was an actual man and he gave his collection to Lazsic.
When did he do that?
This was 1883.
Professor Lieblund told me that after the war the Russians took your Gutenberg Bible.
Yes, yes.
How come they didn't take just that?
Yes, yes, yes.
In this collection was the Gutenberg Bible.
They took the Gutenberg Bible out of this collection?
Yes, yes.
It was the most beautiful part of the collection.
But they left the other things?
Yes, yes.
That's terrible.
Yes, very, very terrible.
And we hope that the Russians will give us... I hope so too, but don't hold your breath as we say in my country.
Mr. Norman from USA has wrote about this problem.
with our Gutenberg Bible.
Mr. Norman?
Yes, he has a census, he has made a census about all Gutenberg Bibles in the world, and he wrote about the Leipzig Gutenberg Bible.
Who's Norman?
Norman.
Is he an American?
Yes, yes.
It was in the 16th year's
Is that what it's called, the Leipzig Bible?
It's called the Leipzig?
Yes.
And it's still, they call it... But in the university, library of university, also two Bibles of Gutenberg.
They've gone to?
Also to Russia.
So there are no Gutenberg Bibles here in Leipzig?
One in the university library.
Okay, good.
And so you're the librarian?
What's your title?
My title is Wissenschaftliche Bibliothekaren.
But you are director of this?
No, no, no, no.
I have a director.
I see.
Okay.
And, but in the history of our museum, Heinrich Klemborstreich, 1885, is the Custos Karl Behrend Lorich
had collected bindings from Germany and England and antiquarian trade and so to begin of our century a great collection of bindings came in the museum 400 bindings of baroque and
and also of oriental bindings.
And the two part, this is going to Russian.
And now we have some new bindings of the 20th century of binders of Leipzig and GDR,
And now we try to work with binders and to buy new binders, bindings, hand bindings.
Okay.
Our museum is working with the praxis, with the reality of polygraphy and printing in Leipzig.
And so expositions and we have wide collections of
manufacturers and archives of firms and in German it's a publication of books.
Very interesting.
You're going to take me to see it?
Yes, yes.
And also we work together with artists and with high school or high school of art in Leipzig to take
contact to have with students and professors and teachers of the School of Arts and we take their
diplomas and their illustrations and their writing teletrophies in our collections.
And also we have occasions
The book museum in Deutsche Bücher in Leipzig has one specific aspect, that you combine all branches around the book in one museum.
This is unique.
Book trade, book illustration, book production, binding, all the aspects.
And even the development of letters, of... Oh, types.
And therefore, if anybody is working here, he can see the interdisciplinarity of this branch in a way which you will never have... I've never seen anything like it.
And what we both want to do next year is...
To enhance the space of the Book Museum, we want to have a separate building attached to the Deutsche Bücherei so that the reading rooms will be in a better condition and we want more showrooms
for the presentation.
It's really beautiful.
I've never seen anything like it.
I had no idea that Leipzig was such a center for... It was the center of... I wrote in my notebook, get a history of Leipzig when I get home.
I have to read.
I had no idea.
And you see, maybe you have seen the exhibition, Mercure and... Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
And this is...
This shows you quite good that Leipzig was a focus of the development of printing and publishing in Germany.
Amazing.
Very concentrated.
It's great.
And this building is beautiful.
It's really beautiful.
Congratulations.
We call it Jugendstil Art Deco.
Kind of.
And the reading room for science is just finished again and it's Bauhaus.
it's very nice to hear from you